Supernova

Death throws of a star
Centuries to Discover
Rarely seen (rare)
Supernova hunters
Stars stay the same for a long time
Brightens over 1 night. (TIME)
Need to look beyond milky way.
Best year discovered 100
Look randomly repeatedly and occassionaly find one. (Difficult)
Only a few supernova per galaxy per century (RARE)
Automatically take huge pictures.
Far away - can only see because of magnitude (RARE / SCALE / DIFFICULT).
everything on earth made of 92 elements - stars made of this too. -
 seen in starlight.
 Different elements produce different colours.
 these can be seen in pictures of supernovas - spectrum created which show different elements. (quiz on colours).
 Where did elements come from? - Fred Hoyle. - Supernova? (radical idea). Contraversial.
 Red Giants = alchemists but not hot enough to create all the elements, thought supernova would be perfect.
 Did calculations to prove it to show final stages give the right conditions.
 Key was stars fight against gravity - goes through series of reactions, becomes fuel for next set of reactions.
 Most massive stars are able to fuse heavier elements in layers.
	Creating pressure to resist pressure of gravity.
	Different layers (quiz) iron at the core - fusion ends.
	When fusion ends gravity wins. - star doomed.
	When iron reaches critical stage (about size of earth but more massive).
	Electron pressure is not enough to support against gravity so starts to collapse.
	Collapses to size of city and then rebounds - launching supernova.
Able to produce the rarer elements (quiz on which).
	Those needed for life come specifically from supernova. (Nuclear waste).
Suns = gods, creators. To create Earth several hundred generations of stars needed to come and go.
Suns form from collapsing clouds of dust and gas.
Shine for millions/billions 
Bloating in old age to red giants.
Core contract to white dwarves.
Most massive explode into supernova - producing elements needed for next generation of stars.
Supernova may look like death of star - but life beyond the grave?
Scientists looked at equations and predicted new things (neutron stars).
